[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Few people
have captured our imaginations
in the modern era of film more
than the late Marilyn Monroe.
Her life was made more
beguiling and mysterious due
to the circumstances
of her death
and rumored involvement
with the Kennedys.
Filmmaker Paul Davids
is with us today
to talk about the string of data
that shows the smoking gun may
have involved CIA
secrets carelessly
divulged by JFK during
pillow talk with Marilyn.
Wow.
To me this is a really
interesting story,
because it's the
story of someone
who really unwittingly became
a pawn in a very large game.
>>PAUL DAVIDS: It's the
subject of my new movie--
>>BOTH: "Marilyn
Monroe Declassified."
>>REGINA: And we have
a lot of other films.
You are a prolific filmmaker.
We've already talked to
you about the film "Jesus
in India."
You have another one
about the afterlife
we'll be talking about later.
You have a lot of really
fabulous-- and all of them
are kind of edgy-- films.
>>DAVIDS: Can we mention, for
example, "Roswell" for Showtime
was one of the first.
>>REGINA: Yes,
"Roswell" for Showtime.
And this story is going
to start weaving back
into this story of Marilyn, too.
>>DAVIDS: There's a connection.
>>REGINA: So thank you
for bringing that up.
First of all, let's paint
a picture of the times
that all of this was
set in, because I
think people, especially younger
people today watching this,
don't understand what was going
on in the '60s politically,
socially, and so forth, that
set this whole scenario up.
>>DAVIDS: Well, the
'60s, the early '60s,
marked the end of Marilyn
Monroe's fabulous career.
She died August 4, 1962.
Officially they say
the 5th because that's
when the death was reported.
But the evidence is she
passed away on the 4th.
John F. Kennedy was president.
She had been close
to John F. Kennedy
since before he got the
Democratic nomination
to run for president in 1960.
Her career was amazing.
She started life, really,
raised in an orphanage
and in foster homes, nine
different foster homes.
>>REGINA: There was even
contention over her actual name
and the name on her
birth certificate.
>>DAVIDS: Yes.
She was born Norma
Jeane Mortenson,
and then she was often
called Norma Jeane Baker.
There was a question
about the father.
Her mother was a film editor at
RKO Studios, the studios that
brought us "King Kong" and a
lot of other great classics.
So she was raised in
Hollywood and surrounded
by all of the excitement
and glamor of the movie
stars of those days.
Her career began to have its
beginnings in the late 1940s.
And then she did--
>>REGINA: She was just a girl.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, teenager.
And she was singled out when
John Huston, the great director
and actor, hired her for a part
in his classic "The Asphalt
Jungle."
It was her first role
where people really
took notice of her.
She was in a great
string of comedies,
"How to Marry a
Millionaire," "Bus Stop."
My favorite, I think,
is "Some Like It Hot."
>>REGINA: I think mine, too.
Yeah.
>>DAVIDS: It's wonderful.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DAVIDS: And, of course,
"The Prince and the Showgirl"
they made a movie, "My
Week with Marilyn,"
which was about the filming of
"The Prince and the Showgirl."
>>REGINA: That was
a wonderful film.
That was out about five
years ago, I think,
four or five years ago.
>>DAVIDS: You mean
it was re-released?
Oh, the "My Weeks with Marilyn."
>>REGINA: Yeah, with
Eddie Remayne, I think.
>>DAVIDS: It was a stunning
performance by Eddie Redmayne.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it really was.
>>DAVIDS: So again, along the
way she had several marriages.
The first marriage
was to Jim Dougherty.
>>REGINA: Now let's
talk about that.
Most people have never heard
of Jim Dougherty in this story.
And let's talk about
the circumstances
she was living in that
necessitated that marriage.
>>DAVIDS: Well, first of all,
I think she was around 16 years
old.
And she would have been
sent back to the orphanage
if she hadn't gotten
married instead.
Because the foster family she
was with was moving back East,
and it wasn't going to work
for them to take her with them.
But Jim Dougherty was
sort of a boy next door
in the neighborhood, and the
marriage happened very quickly.
But he joined I think it
was the Merchant Marines.
And then he was gone.
They really didn't
have a marriage.
She lived with his mother.
And then she began taking
modeling jobs, got an agent.
She was appearing on the
cover of various magazines.
>>REGINA: Should we take a
peek at some of the clips
from her very early years?
>>DAVIDS: OK.
>>REGINA: Is that OK?
We lifted it from your film.
Let's take a quick peek.
>>Every major female
pop icon, they all
go through their Marilyn phase.
Because Marilyn has
stimulated their imaginations
and their image, and it's
quite extraordinary the way
they all copy Marilyn.
She created something that
touches something very deep.
>>REGINA: What a fresh,
beautiful young woman.
But you knew from her
background she wasn't one
that you should leave
alone for too long, right?
>>DAVIDS: Well, she got
the interest of an agent.
And so she started to
get the small parts.
She also had an offer to pose,
pin-up, for a nude calendar.
And she received $50 for it.
It was the Golden Dreams
calendar, became very famous.
It sold millions of copies, more
than any other pin-up calendar
in history.
>>REGINA: And there was
just something about her,
and we'll talk about that
in a little bit, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: But she was putting
her future career in jeopardy
by posing nude for that, because
it wasn't done at that time
by studio actresses.
It was discovered later that
that was Marilyn Monroe.
Because at that point, really,
people didn't know her.
>>REGINA: Just a girl.
>>DAVIDS: It caught up with her.
The marriage to Jim
Doughterty ended
I think after a few years.
And then along came
baseball great Joe DiMaggio.
>>REGINA: Now, where
did "Playboy" figure in?
Because we just read, of
course, "Playboy" is no longer
going to be doing total nudes.
>>DAVIDS: And she was the cover
of the very first "Playboy."
>>REGINA: The first one.
>>DAVIDS: And the Golden Dreams
shot was the first centerfold.
I don't think-- they didn't call
it "centerfold" in those days.
I think it was the
"Sweetheart of the Month"
or something like that.
>>REGINA: And
"Playboy" has abandoned
that that because they said
almost every sex act available
is one click away.
Let's do something
a little classier.
Thank you.
>>DAVIDS: Well, they
consider nudity passe.
But in those days, of course,
it was forbidden territory.
It was very risque.
And Hugh Hefner got a hold of
the rights to that calendar
pose after it had
been disseminated.
And he used it for the
first "Playboy," as we said.
So he came into the
picture a little bit--
>>REGINA: Smart move.
>>DAVIDS: --a little bit later.
>>REGINA: --on his part
to launch that magazine.
>>DAVIDS: It helped make him.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DAVIDS: And he
finds Marilyn Monroe
so endearing and important
to his own career
that he's purchased the
crypt right next to hers.
>>REGINA: Oh, I
didn't know that.
>>DAVIDS: It's in Westwood.
He's going to spend
eternity next to her.
He talks about that.
>>REGINA: Oh.
If not her soul, at least
her bones. [CHUCKLING]
>>DAVIDS: But along comes Joe
DiMaggio, the great baseball
player.
And when she met
him, she didn't know.
She heard he was
a great sportsman.
She didn't know if he was a
baseball player or a football
player.
It was ridiculous.
>>REGINA: Not to make her
sound like she's a dumb blonde,
because she was not dumb.
>>DAVIDS: She was not.
Well, early in her
career, they often
cast her as the dumb blonde.
And she was actually brunette.
The platinum bleach-blonde--
>>REGINA: That was
cultivated later.
>>DAVIDS: That was part of
her Marilyn Monroe character
that she created.
She said it takes a smart
brunette to play a dumb blonde.
>>REGINA: Very funny funny.
>>DAVIDS: She
married Joe DiMaggio,
and she didn't know much
about his baseball career.
He hadn't seen her movies.
And it was a strange match.
But it was a storybook romance.
I mean, it was in
all of the newsreels.
>>REGINA: He loved her.
>>DAVIDS: He did.
He proved that with
his devotion to her
even after they were divorced.
Because the marriage
didn't work out.
They loved one another,
couldn't live together,
couldn't be husband and wife.
But the love never died, really.
When they separated, this is
where her life really began
to get complicated, Regina.
Because her next husband
was Arthur Miller,
a Jewish playwright, one
of America's greatest--
>>REGINA: Very political.
>>DAVIDS: --greatest
playwrights, "The Crucible,"
"Death of a Salesman."
He wrote "After the Fall" about
his relationship with Marilyn.
And he was portrayed in that
"My Week with Marilyn" movie.
It turned out to be a
very stormy marriage.
But he was a leftist,
a communist sympathizer
in those days, if not
an actual communist.
But those were the days of the
House Un-American Activities
Committee.
And you asked about painting
a picture of the era,
and this is the era
that we get to that it's
so important to understand
what she got caught up in.
Because through her
marriage to Arthur Miller,
she caught the
attention of the FBI.
They were watching him.
He was subpoenaed to testify
before the House Un-American
Activities Committee
and asked to name names.
He didn't.
He was found in contempt.
He might have gone to jail.
The contempt charge
was reversed.
But the surveillance of
Marilyn and Arthur Miller,
the tapping of the phones,
spying on them from the FBI.
Who were their friends?
They associated with a lot
of leftists in that era.
She went to Mexico
with Freddie--
>>REGINA: Part of
the Vanderbilt clan.
>>DAVIDS: Vanderbilt. Yeah.
And he was a communist.
As a matter of fact, I
think he'd been disinherited
by the Vanderbilts.
So why was she doing this?
I mean, she was political.
And she did have some
leftist leanings.
I mean, she was very sympathetic
toward causes like integration
in those days, which the
communists were promoting.
The blacks and the whites
shouldn't be separated.
They should be able to live
in the same neighborhoods.
>>REGINA: Well, she'd been
through enough suffering.
She probably had a very
open kind of heart.
>>DAVIDS: Well, yes, she did.
>>REGINA: For
suffering of all kinds.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, as an
orphan and as somebody
who was impoverished.
She very, very much
sympathized with people
who had those kinds
of disadvantages.
Those leanings and
those philosophies
caused her to be under
the eye of J. Edgar
Hoover, then head of the FBI,
and the Central Intelligence
Agency.
She even was noticed by the
head of counterintelligence
of the CIA, James Angleton,
who is a man-- you didn't
want to be on his radar screen.
>>REGINA: And she
was on all of them.
>>DAVIDS: She was
on all of them.
>>REGINA: Her phones
were tapped, everything.
>>DAVIDS: She was such
a sensation, of course.
When she spoke,
the world listened.
And her marriage to
Aurthur Miller did fail.
And she met John F.
Kennedy-- John F. Kennedy.
>>REGINA: And so just going
again on this theme of it
takes a smart brunette
to play a dumb blonde,
it sounds like she was a
fairly avid reader, enjoyed
Shakespeare, enjoyed of
variety of types of music.
Some were classically inclined.
She was not a--
>>DAVIDS: We've got a picture
of her reading James Joyce.
>>REGINA: Yeah, James Joyce.
>>DAVIDS: One of the
most difficult books
in the English language.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
So Marilyn is not what people
what she portrayed herself
to be.
Because a lot of
people think, why
would someone as brilliant
as John F. Kennedy
and also Arthur Miller
hang out with a ditz.
That's a part that a lot
of people wouldn't get.
They can't be that dense.
>>DAVIDS: The ditz was a
character that she created.
It's like Lucille Ball.
Was Lucille Ball--
>>REGINA: She was very savvy
businesswoman and actress.
>>DAVIDS: Of course she was.
But she played a
dingbat hair-brain.
And the character she
created in "I Love Lucy"--
>>REGINA: I'm just
saying that to note this
was a woman with intelligence
and passion and conviction.
>>DAVIDS: Yes, who
created a character.
So Seymour--
>>REGINA: So now she's met JFK.
>>DAVIDS: Seymour Hersh.
>>REGINA: And let's talk
about who introduced her
because this plans in again.
>>DAVIDS: Sure.
And I want to say some of
this is covered-- of course,
we deal with all of this in my
film "Marilyn Declassified."
And the reason
"Declassified," it's
because that through the
Freedom of Information Act,
declassified documents
from the FBI.
And a particular document
we have from the CIA
brings light to the dark
shadows of Marilyn's life
that we didn't really
understand or know about before.
And it also leads us to a
lot of conclusions about how
and why she died at age 36.
Because it was declared
officially a probable suicide.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we'll get to all
that in a moment.
Let's see how she got there.
Let's talk about-- let's get
into Kennedy, how she met him.
>>DAVIDS: She met him
through his brother-in-law,
Peter Lawford.
And actually, he
hung out with her
at Peter Lawford's beach house,
but actually I take that back.
I think it was
Frank Sinatra that
originally introduced them.
Now, Frank Sinatra is
a very important man
in this in the sense that
his mafia connections
are very, very well known.
He had a personal relationship
with Sam Giancana, the head
mobster of the
Chicago syndicate,
who was a very dangerous.
Man he'd ordered a lot
of deaths, a lot of hits.
He was personally charming.
People that knew him--
>>REGINA: Charismatic, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: He was charismatic.
People that knew him
enjoyed his company.
He had a certain charm.
But he was a gangster.
And you had that connection
with Frank Sinatra,
and you had John F.
Kennedy meeting Marilyn
Monroe in this way.
And the Kennedy family
itself had these connections
to the Mob that have been
documented as part of history.
They're not controversial.
It goes back to the
father Joseph Kennedy.
>>REGINA: Right.
Yet--
>>DAVIDS: We need
to talk about that.
>>REGINA: We do, and then
RFK going after the Mob, OK.
>>DAVIDS: So Joseph Kennedy,
his connections with the Mob
go back to the bootlegging
days during Prohibition.
He was a bootlegger.
He made a lot of the
Kennedy fortune that way.
And when John F. Kennedy
was running for President,
Joseph Kennedy went
to Sam Giancana,
the head of the Chicago
Mob, and asked for his help
in delivering Chicago in
Illinois into the Kennedy camp.
He wanted help from Jimmy Hoffa,
the head of the Teamsters.
The Mob had a certain
influence there,
and by getting the Teamsters'
endorsement for Kennedy,
it helped ensure his
pathway to the White House.
And the argument, the
father, Joseph Kennedy,
made to Sam Giancana
was, you're going
to be much better off with
a Kennedy in the White House
than Nixon as far as the
persecution of the mafia.
Trust us.
Well, there's a rather famous
book that's been written
called "Double Cross." by
Chuck Giancana, the brother,
and another Sam Giancana, who's
a nephew, that really helps
us understand the
extent to which there
was a double cross of the Mob.
This is so important
for understanding
the background that lays the
stage for putting together
the details of Marilyn
Monroe's death.
Because she was a pawn
on this chess board.
And the Mob did deliver
Chicago for JFK.
He won by a hair's breath.
And they expected
sort of payback.
Well, JFK assigned his
brother, appointed him
attorney general,
Bobby Kennedy, RFK.
And RFK made it his mission
in life to go after the Mob
and persecute them and prosecute
them and send as many--
>>REGINA: Well, and
Jimmy Hoffa, too.
>>DAVIDS: Send as many
to jail as he could.
In "Marilyn Monroe
Declassified,"
we paint the picture
of all of this history.
They were called before
his Senate committee,
Hoffa having to
testify, Sam Giancana
being accused of stuffing
his enemies in a truck.
So can you imagine the vendetta,
the atmosphere of anger,
resentment, double cross?
We put you in the White House,
was the attitude of the Mob.
And now you do this to us?
Do you mess with the Mob that
way, your brother, Bobby?
A curse on his head.
>>REGINA: And there is
something very cryptic that
happened that is very famous
and people know about,
but they probably didn't
hear the intro to it
as giving, I don't know whether
it was a warning or what,
about what they were going
to do to Marilyn Monroe.
And that has to
do a little bit--
we'll talk about it in a minute,
Peter Lawford introducing her
as she sang the famous
birthday song to President--
>>DAVIDS: Well, that
was in her last year.
It was the spring.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>DAVIDS: It was
either march or may.
But she died in
August, in months.
>>REGINA: But the
point is, I don't
know what Lawford's relationship
was, but was that a slip?
Let's--
>>DAVIDS: No, no, no.
What that was-- because he
introduces her as the late
Marilyn--
>>REGINA: Yeah, I was just--
we were going to run that.
>>DAVIDS: Well,
she was backstage
getting her makeup on.
She was becoming Marilyn Monroe.
>>REGINA: The late
Marilyn Monroe.
>>DAVIDS: They announced
her a couple of times.
Here's Marilyn Monroe.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
here's the late--
>>DAVIDS: She's not here.
She's not here.
And she finally shows up.
So she's introduced
as the late--
>>REGINA: Let's look at that
clip, because it became very
cryptic later. [LAUGHING]
OK, people know it,
but let's look at
what happened here.
>>Her most famous
film appearance
could well be when she sang
"Happy Birthday" to John F.
Kennedy, and that piece
of film is truly iconic,
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President."
>>Mr. President, the
late Marilyn Monroe.
[APPLAUSE]
>>(SINGING) Happy birthday--
>>To look at her
that night, you would
think there was
absolutely nothing wrong.
You look at this
woman, who seems
at the height of her
powers during that,
and now that we know in
retrospect that there
was much more to
this relationship
with the president,
it's quite interesting.
>>Everybody!
Happy birthday!
>>They had to keep announcing
her, here's Marilyn Monroe,
here's Marilyn Monroe,
and they finally announce,
here's the late Marilyn Monroe.
Six months later, she was
the late Marilyn Monroe
because her death
happened in August.
>>It is my conclusion that
the death of Marilyn Monroe
was caused by a
self-administered overdose
of sedative drugs and
that the mode of death
is probably suicide.
>>REGINA: And she was
dead within six months.
She did become the
late Marilyn Monroe.
>>DAVIDS: She did.
And it was soon after she sang
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President"
that John F. Kennedy
felt he had to break off
the relationship with her.
Now, Seymour Hersh, who wrote
the book, an excellent book,
called "The Dark
Side of Camelot,"
he documents very accurately
through many interviews
the affair between John F.
Kennedy and Marilyn Monroe.
They were sexually involved,
these two great icons
of that era.
But JFK got the warning
from J. Edgar Hoover.
All of his various affairs
were being watched by the FBI.
And he assigned
his brother Bobby
to give him help
in going to Marilyn
and making her
understand that it just
had to stop, these calls to
the White House switchboard,
the expectation of visiting
the White House, the pressure
that she was putting on him.
She did love him.
>>REGINA: And she was
being rejected by him now.
>>DAVIDS: She was
being rejected by him,
and she had a lot of rejection
from men in her life.
When Bobby had to sort
of take over for Jack,
he developed a relationship
with Marilyn Monroe.
We don't know how far it went.
At least we know it was
a very strong friendship.
And there was a letter written
sort of joking about the fact
that they were now an item.
We don't know whether
they really were.
But look at who she was
playing with at that point.
She's dealing with the most
powerful men in the world.
And yet she's associated
with Frank Sinatra
and through him Sam Giancana.
And she shows up dead in August
after singing "Happy Birthday,
Mr. President."
Now, we need to
really understand it.
We need to talk a little
more about Sam Giancana
and how the CIA was using
him and the Mob at that time.
It's part of history.
It's well documented in many
books, including Seymour Hersh.
So Sam Giancana had been
enlisted to help the CIA get
rid of Fidel Castro.
It was a goal of the
Kennedy administration.
They wanted him eliminated.
They wanted him assassinated.
And when the CIA enlisted
the Mob to do that,
to attempt that, it's an
arm's-length transaction.
Because if anything
goes wrong, it
reflects on the Mob, who
lost all their casinos when
Fidel Castro took over.
>>REGINA: Right.
Now wait a minute.
Was RFK or JFK
aware that the CIA
was using Giancana in that way?
>>DAVIDS: I'm sure that
Robert Kennedy was not aware.
Because it's documented--
>>REGINA: That makes a
difference at this point.
>>DAVIDS: --at the
point that he found out.
He was furious, because
he was trying to put
Sam Giancana [INAUDIBLE].
He was furious.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That's why I'm wondering.
>>DAVIDS: Absolutely furious.
But JFK had carried on a secret
relationship with Sam Giancana,
seeking his help on many things
that required secret payoffs.
The go-between was a mistress
that they both shared.
Judith Campbell
Exner was a mistress
to JFK and at first a friend to
Sam Giancana, whose girlfriend
was the singer Phyllis McGuire.
He wasn't looking for another
plaything at that time.
But eventually then
she was a mistress
we think at the same time
for both of these men,
the president of
the United States,
the most powerful
man in the world,
and the most powerful Mobster--
>>REGINA: --in the world
are sharing the same lover.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah.
And it's a fact.
So you had the FBI
and Robert Kennedy
persecuting Sam Giancana,
sending agents after him,
insulting him when he gets off
an airplane, shouting at him
that he ought to be behind bars.
And he's not able to reveal the
fact he's working for the CIA.
Robert Maheu enlisted
him for Project Mongoose.
Now, they failed at
eliminating Fidel Castro.
That's history.
We know it didn't work.
But the establishment
of Sam Giancana
as the private,
right-arm elimination
squad when the CIA needed
somebody taking care of,
that was precedent.
That was known.
Now, what we get
to here, Regina,
is the fact that there is
a confession in the murder
of Marilyn Monroe.
The official story, as we
know, was a probable suicide.
>>REGINA: Which, that's
not what's written.
>>DAVIDS: From overdose.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
They don't usually
write "probable."
>>DAVIDS: Yeah, they
don't usually use the word
"probable"-- almost never.
>>REGINA: Unless it looks like
it's headed toward a cover-up.
>>DAVIDS: There were
signs of a cover-up
absolutely from the beginning.
>>REGINA: The first minutes.
>>DAVIDS: And I want
to say, for those
who are the doubters-- because
there are a lot of people that
think that if it wasn't suicide,
it was an accidental overdose.
She had the drugs there,
she took too many.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but the means
of administration of the drug
and some of those--
>>DAVIDS: Well,
there's evidence for--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
we'll talk about it.
>>DAVIDS: Yeah, there's
evidence about that.
But the important thing
I want to drive home
is the fact that
there are two police
chiefs of Los Angeles
that made comments
about this years later.
One was Darryl Gates, who
established for us one
of the debated points, that
Robert Kennedy was in Los
Angeles the day of her death.
And there's a lot of
testimony that he visited her
that afternoon.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
talk about what happened
when we were stopped also.
Finish that one.
>>DAVIDS: Before
we go there, I want
to say if he was at her
house that afternoon,
there are a lot of things
on the internet accusing
Bobby Kennedy, or
both Bobby and John,
of having been behind the
death of Marilyn Monroe.
There have been books
written about that.
Margolis and Buskin had
a recent book about that.
I do agree she was murdered.
I do not agree, as a
basis of my research,
that the Kennedys ordered this.
I don't think so.
I think we can put the pieces
together a different way.
>>REGINA: We're going to bring
up the timing of all of this
anyway.
But let's go back to Giancana.
>>DAVIDS: Well, there
were two points.
The one point was
that Darryl Gates
said Bobby Kennedy was
there that afternoon.
The other one is that
Police Chief Thomas Reddin
said that after she
died, it was treated
as a high-level
intelligence operation.
>>REGINA: Exactly, yes.
>>DAVIDS: This is the
most important point
for those who want
to stick to the idea
that it was a suicide
or an accidental death.
>>REGINA: Wouldn't
be treated like that.
>>DAVIDS: They sent in a squad.
They knew that she was
deceased by somewhere
probably between 9 or
10 o'clock on August 4.
Why wasn't her death
reported until 3:30
in the morning the
next day, the 5th?
And anywhere you
look on the internet,
they say she died on the 5th.
That's when it was reported.
It's not true.
We know there was six hours
where they cleaned things up.
The body was laid out
to look like a suicide.
All fingerprints in the
house were wiped down.
So Bobby Kennedy's
fingerprints wouldn't
be found for having been
there that afternoon.
Thomas Reddin, police chief,
has established this for us.
And we know from Arthur
Jacobs, a publicist of Marilyn,
who was at the Hollywood
Bowl the night of the 4th,
he got the word about
Marilyn's demise
before the concert he
was at was even over.
He was a Henry Mancini
concert that night.
He's testified about this.
We've heard this.
So he got involved right after
the death, getting over there.
Her psychiatrist,
Greenson, got in there.
Peter Lawford got in there.
Peter Lawford went to a man
he didn't know had actually
wiretapped Marilyn's house,
Fred Otash, asking for help
in cleaning up the place.
But Chief Reddin tells us
that a top-secret intelligence
operation took care of
it, took care of business.
And then it was reported that
she was dead with a phone call
from the psychiatrist to
a beat police Sergeant
at the station house who didn't
know what had been going on
for the last six hours.
And he came in and is shown
the body, shown the pills.
>>REGINA: And this
is the beginning
of the official story.
>>DAVIDS: That's
the official story.
>>REGINA: So, I was also
intrigued with the whole visit
by RFK.
It said here that a
Lincoln Continental was
seen driving away from our
neighborhood going 75 in a 25
and was pulled over by a cop.
Peter Lawford was in the front.
RFK was in the back, right?
18 eyewitnesses saw--
>>DAVIDS: Bobby Kennedy
in town that day.
>>REGINA: Bobby Kennedy
And oddly, considering
his position,
there were no police escorts.
No police were following him,
even though he was supposedly
being watched by the FBI.
>>DAVIDS: He would usually
have bodyguards leaving town.
>>REGINA: Bodyguards
and so forth.
None of that was happening.
>>DAVIDS: You see,
a lot of this is
what causes there to be so much
suspicion that he was involved
in causing her death.
>>REGINA: But he
was being followed.
He was tapped, she was tapped.
Everybody knew the
convergence of these events,
that he was coming to say, you
gotta lay off, Marilyn, right?
>>DAVIDS: Yeah.
But we get to the
most important point,
that there's a confession on
the table from Sam Giancana's
relatives.
This is from Chuck Giancana
in the book "Double Cross"--
and he's said this
publicly on television,
and the nephew Sam Giancana--
that Sam told them that he had
Marilyn eliminated at the
behest, under contract,
of the CIA.
Now, this is where it gets
really, really interesting.
Sam Giancana, who hated Robert
Kennedy, sent in a hit squat,
according to this
information, on a day
that Robert Kennedy had
been there expecting
that he'd kill two birds
with one stone, so to speak.
It's like blackmail or
cornering Robert Kennedy,
that the police
would come in, they'd
find Robert Kennedy's
fingerprints.
Boy, wouldn't he have a tough
time explaining that one.
They might find
letters from him,
Robert Kennedy,
correspondence with Marilyn,
things that would tie
her to the Kennedys.
But all of that was cleaned up.
Nevertheless, we're told that
Sam Giancana chose that time.
He knew through wiretaps
Kennedy had been there.
And he sent in a hit squad.
There were people
like Johnny Roselli,
a mobster in Hollywood, who
was a friend of Marilyn Monroe.
She would have opened
the door for him.
And there I've been
books written speculating
who the actual hit team was.
You've got books by Milo
Sperilgio, such as "Crypt 33."
There's two books by Robert
Slatzer, whose credibility
has been questioned.
But nevertheless,
the murder theory
has been around with us
for a long, long time.
>>REGINA: Well, and
then you get into-- we
didn't talk about any
of the toxicity reports
or what was said to be the
delivery system of the drugs
potentially.
>>DAVIDS: There were
a lot of indicators
that the official story of
swallowing too many pills
didn't hold up.
They didn't find
undissolved pill capsules.
They did find a
discoloration of the colon,
a purplish discoloration
indicated in the autopsy report
that would indicate the
possibility of a suppository
injection that hit the colon of
a high does of a barbiturate.
They also found chloral
hydrate in her blood,
which she might have taken that
afternoon just as prescription
thing.
But you mix chloral hydrate
with Nembutal, and you're dead.
And you're dead.
>>REGINA: And they would have
known whatever prescription
drugs she was on theoretically.
>>DAVIDS: Sure.
Absolutely.
So now, one of
the things I think
is unique about my film "Marilyn
Monroe Declassified" in the way
it ties all of this together
is the likely answer is
it addresses Sam
Giancana's claim
that the CIA had
put him up to this.
It's extremely
interesting that there
is a document from the CIA,
signed by counterintelligence
Chief James Angleton
the day before she died,
August 3, that indicates
what the wiretaps have been.
In this case, it's wiretaps of
Dorothy Kilgallen, who Marilyn
knew and talked to, where
Marilyn had spilled the beans
on some things in talks
with Dorothy Kilgallen that
were classified that Marilyn
shouldn't have known.
And the CIA sees from Dorothy
Kilgallen's conversation
that this information
is being passed around,
that Marilyn is
disgruntled, that she's
considering going public,
holding a press conference.
Who knows what
she's going to say?
Now, if the decision,
as Sam Giancana claims,
had been made that they
had to eliminate her,
they couldn't take the risk
of this classified information
being released.
They were more concerned
about that, apparently,
than exposing the
Kennedy affair.
They were there protecting their
own turf and their own secrets.
So if that letter
from the CIA has
the import that
we think it does,
then it's very strong
evidence that Sam Giancana's
confession it is true that he
got the contract from the CIA.
Because we have a document
that shows what the CIA
motivation would have
been for hiring him again,
like he was hired to deal with--
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>DAVIDS: The
pieces fit together.
The signature of James
Angleton on the document-- I'm
not a signature expert
in this, but looks good.
There are very few examples of
that signature you could find.
We certainly found
one we could compare.
So people ask, well,
is that document real?
Because they dismissed
it for a lot of reasons.
And we want to go into
that, because some of it
involves actually
the information she
knew that had to do with UFOs.
>>REGINA: OK, so
there's a soundbite here
that we have that has
to do with a visit
by JFK to a secret airbase.
Now, we know in other shows
that I and other people
here have done this is
not the first time we've
heard that JFK was in support
of various secret space programs
and so forth.
Can we listen to
that particular part
of the documentary for a sec?
>>DAVIDS: Sure.
>>What was the top-secret event
that JFK told Marilyn about?
This really implies
something devastating.
It implies that the
Roswell incident,
the UFO crash, the famous,
legendary crash, occurred.
And JFK is telling
Marilyn Monroe about it.
The CIA is bugging this
conversation and freaking out.
Did this really happen?
Well, certainly the newspapers
of the day said it did.
And TV reports even now
still report this as fact.
>>>>[INAUDIBLE] document claims
Marilyn's wiretap recorded
her describing the
visit by the president
to a secret airbase for the
purpose of inspecting things
from outer space.
A reference in Mexico
in the late 1940s
points straight to
the Roswell incident.
This document was written
and presumably distributed
on August 3, 1962.
>>REGINA: OK, now,
it's been said even
in other interviews I've done,
other research I've done,
JFK was aware of a secret space
program and various things.
He wasn't in a
need-to-know position,
but he asked a lot of
questions, and he did
have apparent
involvement in some
of these programs, these
off-planet culture,
UFO, ET programs.
>>DAVIDS: Regina, that
tapped conversation
with Dorothy Kilgallen,
she's indicating
she thought the secret
airbase visit was related
to the crashed flying saucer
incident in the Southwest,
the Roswell incident of 1947,
that it actually was real
and that JFK had tipped
off Marilyn about that.
>>REGINA: Well, if you
read Philip Corso's work,
and you know him,
after Roswell we
know that all of that
material was brought up
for physical review
and parted out
for development during the
Kennedy administration.
>>DAVIDS: I think
that-- I've often
asked myself the
question, why did I delve
so deeply into this mystery?
>>REGINA: Because you've done
this Roswell documentary.
>>DAVIDS: That's part of it.
I was the executive producer and
co-writer of a very famous film
called "Roswell."
In the DVD or VHS, they called
it "Roswell, the UFO Cover-Up."
It was with Kyle MacLachlan of
"Twin Peaks" and Martin Sheen,
Dwight Yoakum were
all in this movie.
It wasn't a documentary.
It was a dramatic
film for Showtime.
And in the course of
making the movie, of course
I got to speak to all the
people, many of them now
deceased, but down in Roswell,
who were there at the time.
And all reinforced that
the UFO crash was real,
that the government story
about it was fiction.
And I've heard it
from enough people
to be convinced absolutely
that the government story, all
of them, the Mughal
balloon, the crash
dummies-- every time
the Pentagon comes out
with another report,
they're digging themselves
in a little deeper as
far as I'm concerned.
>>REGINA: One of the
information officer
finally admitted, he said, I
was told to tell that story.
>>DAVIDS: Listen,
I had the privilege
to hear it from astronaut
Gordon Cooper, first to circle
the Earth in orbit.
He called me to a meeting after
he saw the movie, and he said,
you got it right.
And then Edgar Mitchell, who's
walked on the moon, personally
told me why he believed
that the ET crash
story is absolutely true.
So the information is
probably still classified.
And we know that the CIA
document we're talking about
in the movie about Marilyn
Monroe is legitimate,
not just because of the
signature similarity of James
Angleton, but because
the researcher,
who wrote a book called "UFOs
and the Murder of Marilyn
Monroe"-- his name
is Don Burleson--
took that document and with
Freedom of Information Act
request, he said, look,
it refers to wiretaps
of Marilyn's phone.
There must be transcriptions
of the wiretaps.
I'm requesting the
transcriptions,
Freedom of Information.
CIA says, look, we
looked for this.
We can't find it.
But if you want to appeal,
here's the process to appeal.
You have to do it
within 30 days.
So he files an appeal.
On the basis of
that document, you
see, that explosive document
that is so important,
and they accept the appeal
on the basis of the document.
Now, as Don Burleson has
so pointedly explained,
the CIA wouldn't accept a
request like that on appeal
if the document was bogus.
>>REGINA: Exactly, yeah.
>>DAVIDS: When we had this
question about the MJ-12
documents, the
Majestic documents,
and it went to the
FBI for confirmation,
they sent it back to the
requester with the word "Bogus"
written, big letters
on the top of the page.
The CIA never disclaimed
this document as being bogus.
If it's real, what it tells
us is the day before Marilyn's
death, the head of CIA
counterintelligence
was aware that she was talking
about things she shouldn't even
know.
>>REGINA: Things having to
do with JFK's understanding,
awareness, or
involvement in some
of these kinds of confidential
programs, Black Ops,
whatever you want to call it.
>>DAVIDS: Yes.
When I asked,
Regina, when I said
I've often asked myself, how
did I get so deeply involved
in the Marilyn Monroe
story this way,
and I talked about the
Roswell connection,
there is another personal
family connection.
I want to mention for a moment
my father, Professor Dr. Jules
Davids, the late Dr. Jules
Davids, Georgetown University
diplomatic historian,
school of foreign service,
Georgetown, who had Jackie
Kennedy as a student.
And before Kennedy
became president,
he was enlisted by
Ted Sorensen to come
meet with John F.
Kennedy and help him
with the writing of
"Profiles in Courage."
Now, it's been
speculated forever
whether that book
was ghostwritten.
I will say that in the
preface to the book,
my father is mentioned
and is given credit
for having contributed
materially,
assisted materially
in the preparation
of several chapters.
>>REGINA: How did your father
feel about JFK as a man,
as a student, as a man,
as a thinker, philosopher?
>>DAVIDS: My father,
of course, was always
a very loyal Democrat.
And he kept his mouth
shut at the time
when people tried to prove
that the book was ghostwritten,
because then Kennedy shouldn't
have accepted the Pulitzer
Prize for a ghostwritten book.
And I'm not claiming that the
book was actually ghostwritten.
What I want to say
is that my father
was enlisted to write first
drafts of five of the nine
chapters.
And in the movie
business, it would
be like writing a treatment,
and then somebody else
writes the screenplay.
You don't get screenplay
credit for writing a treatment.
You don't get credit
for being the author
of the book for writing the
material that is the foundation
information that
someone else has to put
into a true literary form.
But he was involved
with the Kennedys,
and we had a lot of
letters back and forth.
And I was involved with
the Roswell incident.
So that's how it falls into
my lap, this Marilyn Monroe
story with a document
that connects Roswell,
connects the Kennedys.
And through the research
and reading so many books
by many, many terrific
authors who have investigated,
I have this feeling so strong
that somehow in this universe,
Marilyn is very disquieted
and she is not happy.
I mean, to have the official
verdict be that you are
a probable suicide when you
were eliminate through this kind
of-- it shouldn't be allowed
to sit that way forever,
and "Marilyn Monroe
Declassified"
now has that purpose of saying,
let's set the record straight,
not just for history, but for
the sake of this wonderful
actress--
>>REGINA: Someone
doesn't want it to--
>>DAVIDS: --a
beautiful woman who
entertained us, who was
such a wonderful soul.
>>REGINA: Well,
in fact, you have
John Gilmore, a long, long,
lifetime friend of hers,
who speaks about her
character, and he said,
she was just one of the
most beautiful, wonderful
human beings he had ever known.
>>DAVIDS: He said
she was perfect.
>>REGINA: She was a
perfect human being.
>>DAVIDS: There was
nothing you could say
that wasn't perfect about her.
John Gilmore, by the way, I
appreciate his contribution
to the movie, as I
appreciate so many others.
He wrote books like
"The Black Dahlia."
And he's a great
Hollywood noir writer.
>>REGINA: But he really
has a special spot for her.
Now, again--
>>DAVIDS: I want to mention
he wrote a book about Marilyn,
and also "Laid Bare" is
one of his great books.
Doc Erickson, C. O. Erikson,
he was a production manager
for her wonderful film that
was written by Arthur Miller,
"The Misfits."
>>REGINA: Yes.
I was going to ask
you about that next.
>>DAVIDS: John
Huston directed it.
And so he contributed
to the film,
giving us inside information.
>>REGINA: And I think--
>>DAVIDS: Mora-- Phillippe Mora.
>>REGINA: Yes, Phillippe Mora.
>>DAVIDS: The
terrific director--
he directed
"Communion," speaking
of UFO stories, the
Whitley Strieber story.
He found in an FBI
document that was
declassified that implicated
Robert Kennedy in all
of these events.
Now, I think the implication
was, as Giancanas have said,
is that they intended to time
it to frame Robert Kennedy.
He would have been a victim.
It might have brought
the administration down.
It wasn't that Bobby
Kennedy, in my opinion--
>>REGINA: Knocked her off.
>>DAVIDS: No, I don't think so.
And I think all of these things
on the internet about that are,
in my opinion, ugly and wrong.
And I think Robert Kennedy
was an exceptional man.
He might have been
a great leader.
I don't know that it
was an act of wisdom
for him to go after
the Mob the way
he did in those Senate hearing.
>>REGINA: Well, he paid
for it in the end anyway.
But I think what I was
alluding to with her is,
like a lot of very vulnerable,
sensitive human beings,
it didn't mean that
she was necessarily
stable emotionally right
up through the latter part
of her life.
She was not stable.
And to have the
knowledge she had
and be the keeper of those
secrets of the Kennedys,
that wasn't wise of Kennedy.
She should not have been
made aware of these things,
as unstable as she was.
>>DAVIDS: He compromised
himself, and he--
>>REGINA: And he
compromised her.
He compromised both of their
lives, and neither one of them
lived too long past that date.
And RFK certainly didn't.
>>DAVIDS: He died--
he was assassinated
a year after she died.
She died in August.
So we're not talking
that November,
but the next November of
'63, he's assassinated.
Then a few years after
that, Bobby Kennedy
is assassinated the very day
he wins the California primary.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Regardless of
affairs and all that,
I've always had a soft spot for
all three of those characters
and, in fact, saw
Bobby Kennedy the night
before he died up close.
I was at one of the
rallies in Sacramento
before he flew to LA.
And this is part of the
lack of nuanced thinking
that the internet
thrives on, which
is you can have incredible human
beings with their own frailties
that result in these kinds of
devastating situations, which
really this was, a sad
and devastating affair.
He was being watched.
He was being gone
after, his brother was--
the intelligence agencies
were after his brother.
Everybody was after Marilyn.
That something horrible
didn't happen to the three
of them would have been
surprising, honestly.
>>DAVIDS: Philippe Mora,
who found that FBI document,
had a very good point of
view about all of this.
I like the way he described it.
We had a very turbulent 1960s,
the Vietnam War and a lot
of violence in America.
And he says that the
death of Marilyn Monroe
marks the beginning of
the '60s as we know it,
though it was August 1962.
From there, she was like--
she was the first one.
She was the first one down.
And then--
>>REGINA: By the
intelligence-- I
mean, again, at the hand
of intelligence agencies.
>>DAVIDS: And they've all
paid for it with their lives.
Look, not just John F.
Kennedy and Bob Kennedy.
Sam Giancana ends
up with, what is
it, nine bullets in the brain?
He's assassinated.
And then Johnny Roselli, the
Mobster that he worked with--
I wanted to say that one
of those writers out there
speculated that Johnny
Roselli was in the hit team,
and that by him showing up at
the door, and she knew him--
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
>>DAVIDS: --as a friend.
>>REGINA: Would
have been an entree.
>>DAVIDS: She would have
opened the door for him.
And-- [SNAPS]-- they'd have
just taken care of business like
that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
They're professionals.
>>DAVIDS: It's the Mob.
Yeah, they're professionals.
They hit people.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk
about-- OK, the case was--
>>DAVIDS: Oh, Johnny
Roselli, I just have to say,
Sam Giancana dies
from assassination.
Johnny Roselli ends
up in an oil drum, OK?
Jimmy Hoffa killed and
disappears, never found again.
You see, violence
descended on all of them.
>>REGINA: And some
other misfortune
beyond that-- let's
go to "The Misfits"
and what happened then.
>>DAVIDS: Well, "The Misfits"--
>>REGINA: Famous film, famous,
famous film and the end
is a lot of lives.
>>DAVIDS: Sad, tragic film.
I want to mention that I
knew John Huston personally.
I worked for his
agent, Paul Kohner.
I had the great
opportunity to visit him
in Puerto Vallarta on several
occasions and stay with him--
fabulous, wonderful
director and actor,
a great treasure for America.
He's got a postage
stamp after him.
He directed "The Misfits."
And Marilyn's behavior at
that time was a huge problem.
>>REGINA: Totally
unstable by this time.
>>DAVIDS: She was
unstable, drugs.
>>REGINA: Yeah, alcohol.
>>DAVIDS: They shut down
the production for a week
to let her clean out.
He refused, of course, to fire
her and cast somebody else.
He wouldn't have
finished the film
if that was what he had to do.
But many of the people
involved with "The Misfits"
died soon after the film was--
>>REGINA: Clark Gable.
>>DAVIDS: Clark Gable
drops dead of a heart
attack like two weeks-- two
weeks after the film is done.
>>REGINA: Montgomery Clift.
>>DAVIDS: Montgomery Clift.
There was another, too.
I'm going to forget.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
there is another.
I can't remember, either.
I did write it down.
>>DAVIDS: But they
say that it was
like a cursed film, One of
her dramatic roles, a very
serious role, is contrasted
with her great comedies.
And that was her
last finished film.
She was cast in one more
film called "Something's Got
To Give," a comedy
at 20th Century Fox.
And it was never finished.
It was at about the time when
she sang "Happy Birthday, Mr.
President."
She took time off for that.
They had problems
completing the movie.
She wasn't showing up
on the set all the time.
It was never finished.
And they fired her.
They fired Marilyn Monroe.
But just shortly
before she died,
her attorneys got her rehired
with a better contract,
with guarantees of
future pictures,
with her salary multiplied
many times over.
Is this something that
would depress a woman
to the state of suicide?
>>REGINA: And it wasn't
as though the split-up
was fresh on her doorstep.
That had happened-- really, it
had been happening over months.
So it wasn't new
information to her.
She had other things
going on in their life,
like you said, things to
be very encouraged about.
>>DAVIDS: Well, and
she was also encouraged
that there was a rapprochement
with Joe DiMaggio.
I mean, there was
speculation they
were considering remarrying.
And there's testimony from
Marilyn's housekeeper, Eunice
Murray, that, what, an
hour or so before Marilyn
shows up dead that she had a
phone call from Joe DiMaggio's
son that encouraged
Marilyn so much
and made her bubbly and
happy and she's enthusiastic
and that's her state of mind.
And then within a
couple of hours--
>>REGINA: She was dead.
>>DAVIDS: She's gone.
She's gone.
It doesn't add up.
>>REGINA: It doesn't add up.
>>DAVIDS: It never added up.
>>REGINA: And we only
have a few minutes left,
and I want to
bring up something.
So in 1993, the
case was reopened.
The foreman in charge was
to announce the inquiry.
He was fired from his spot.
And then it was shut down again.
No one wants this information
surrounding her death
and the Kennedys to
surface formally-- period.
It's not going to.
>>DAVIDS: Well, they did
shut down that grand jury.
They fired the foreman.
And he was going to announce
that they were going to--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So they're not going
to let it happen.
>>DAVIDS: It's highly
politically charged.
The Kennedys are involved and
implicated, but not the cause.
>>REGINA: Right I understand
what you're saying.
>>DAVIDS: But the government
did a similar thing
with Jean Seberg,
another famous actress.
They didn't like her support
of the Black Panthers.
They tapped her phone.
They followed her.
They tormented her.
They released false stories
about her to the tabloids.
And it was malicious.
They did drive her to
suicide in that case.
But there is this history
in that dark period
of American history,
in that time,
of the government
agencies functioning
in that way against individuals
that they considered a threat.
>>REGINA: Yes, and all
three of them were a threat.
The Kennedys and Marilyn were
a threat to them at that time.
And so just to wrap
this up, I'd like
to play one more film clip.
And I've forgotten
who was stating it.
It's at the very end, talking
about how disgraceful-- set it
up.
Who's saying this?
>>DAVIDS: At the conclusion of
our film, author Don Burleson,
who worked with
that CIA document,
he expressed his
heartfelt feelings,
his respect for Marilyn
and his sense of sorrow
over all of this.
>>REGINA: Let's go to
that film clip now.
>>Marilyn was an
extraordinary person.
She was so different from
the Hollywood construct
that it's almost
not recognizable.
She was intelligent.
She was well read.
She loved the music
of Bela Bartok.
I mean, she read Thomas Hardy.
She read James Joyce.
She read Shakespeare.
We can't bring her
back, but we can
remedy some of what's
been done to her memory.
It's a national disgrace
what was done to her.
>>REGINA: Again, thank you
so much for taking the time
to do such a fabulous
job on this documentary.
It was very enlightening and
about people that, you know,
it's still our Camelot in
our own hearts and minds
about the beauty that each
of these people exemplified,
regardless of the dark side of
human nature at times as well.
So I want to thank you for
doing that for us and all
these other films you've done.
>>DAVIDS: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And we're going
to talk about another one
yet later.
>>DAVIDS: It's always
a pleasure to be
interviewed by you, Regina.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
This story has been
fascinating on so many levels.
I highly recommend that you
get a copy of the DVD by going
to marilyndeclassified.com
And for the rest of his films,
you can go to
pauldavids-artist.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]